Mentoring Philosophy
====================

	Helping you become the person you want to be

You have joined my research group because we have a shared interest in using
computers to solve problems in molecular biology. Not a lot of people in the
world share this passion, and it is the first of several important bonds we
will share.

There are a lot of ways to be curious and useful in bioinformatics. Where do 
you fit in? Our job is to figure that out. I say _our_ because we are in this 
together. As the mentor, my role is to be your guide, advisor, critic, and 
supporter. As the mentee, your role is to be curious, open-minded, studious, 
and committed. We won't always play our roles perfectly. That's okay. Like 
science, we will always be a work in progress.

I prefer to be honest and open about everything. So let's start off with the 
harsh realitites: science is filled with difficulties. Projects will fail. 
Great ideas will be abandoned. You will get scooped. Your paper/application 
will be rejected for no discernable reason. You will meet geniuses who 
intimidate the fuck out of you. Under these cicrumstances, it is normal for 
mentees to feel overwhelmed and to question their belonging. While _normal_, 
these feelings are also _undeserved_. Scientists are particularly bad at 
self-evaluation and tend to trivialize their worth and contributions.

The particular flavor of science in my lab can make you feel especially 
unprepared. You are entering a research setting at the intersection of 
genetics, molecular biology, statistics, computer science, software 
engineering, and information technology. To be effective, you will not only 
have to know quite a bit about each of these fields, but how to put them 
together in meaningful and novel ways. As a result, it can take a while for you 
to experience the successes that will give you a feeling of mastery.

So how are you going to navigate the complexities and difficulties that lie 
ahead? How are you going to end up feeling a sense of accomplishment and 
belonging in the harsh world of academic science? It starts with communication. 
We have to talk. Often. And not just about the details of your next experiment. 
We need to talk about your goals, both career-based and personal. You have 
chosen a difficult path, and you will need support along the way. Support can 
take many forms from your _research friends_, to your best friend from 6th 
grade, to a professional therapist. No great athletes get where they are alone. 
They all have huge support structures beneath them. Scientists are like the pro 
athletes of the intellecutal world. To be successful, we need support too.

As your mentor, I will be an important part of your support team. And believe 
it or not, you will also be part of mine. We're in this together.
